VOICE INITIATIVE RESEARCH PROPOSAL
Human-Computer Interaction Focus
Julia Rahmeier

INTRODUCTION/MOTIVATION
The Voice Project at RPI aims to create a home-use alternative assistive communication device that can be used by non-verbal children and individuals with profound intellectual and multiple disabilities (PIMD).
Existing assistive communication technologies often fall into two categories. It either relies heavily on refined muscle movement – as seen in devices such as Stephen Hawking’s CallText 5010 or the Tobii eye tracker devices – or it’s simplified to the point where it only offers a limited range of vocabulary for use as seen with picture boards and other aided communication systems. Thus, there exists a significant gap in assistive communication technologies that can emphasize minimizing the cognitive and physical load for non-verbal individuals (especially for those who cannot utilize traditional methods), while maximizing their ability to communicate.
Our overarching goal is to utilize unaided forms of communication such as body language, facial expressions, vocalizations, and physiological reactions to allow individuals affected by PIMD to better convey their thoughts, needs, and emotions more effectively to their caregivers and the world around them. This project, if successful, can be one step forward in providing a more meaningful method of interaction for non-verbal individuals.

RESEARCH PLAN
The overall goal for this semester is to determine whether biodata can in fact reflect the different emotional states that individuals with PIMD are intending to express. We intend on analyzing three specific emotions: fear, sadness and happiness.

This semester, we have conducted preliminary research and literature reviews to identify the most relevant emotions to measure, along with the physiological signs that they show. Based on that information, our plan is to start by tracking heart rate, blood pressure, skin conductance, respiration rate, and body temperature using wearable devices.

GOALS FOR THE SEMESTER
I am personally in charge of the Human-Computer Interaction, so I plan on helping our team achieve the desired end goal through the following steps during the next semester:

Gathering data from individuals with PIMD and their families through surveys and interviews. 
What assistive technology do they use? How does it help them? How does it limit them? What is their child’s attitude towards it? 
Maintaining in touch with connections such as BOTS Community Center in Albany, our main point of contact to families of nonspeaking children with ASD.

Writing a comprehensive market analysis of what solutions are currently available and what benefits and drawbacks each of them has as reported by users and caretakers.

Conducting usability testing on devices we use taking into account unique problems found in people with PIMD such as hypersensitivity to touch, differences in gestures, facial expressions, and the way they process and produce language.

Conduct preliminary research for the design of a more complex communication system and propose ways to decrease the cognitive workload using principles of cognitive ergonomics, while avoiding oversimplifying this process and limiting what the users can express.

REFERENCES
